abstracts : https://predictioncenter.org/casp14/doc/CASP14_Abstracts.pdf

book page : https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/toc/10970134/2021/89/12

assessment paper : https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/prot.26237

----

“Structures of 52 proteins and protein-protein complexes were received from the experimental community in time for the assessments. Forty-two were determined using X-ray crystallography, seven using cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM), and three by NMR.” 

“"TBM-Easy" (easy template modeling) for straightforward template modeling targets, "TBM-Hard” for more difficult homology modeling targets, "FM/TBM” for those with only remote structural homologies and "FM" (Free modeling) for the most difficult set with no detectable homology to known structures. As discussed later, these divisions are no longer very relevant.”

“In CASP13 (2018),18 with the introduction of effective deep-learning methods, the trend line rose to above 60 on the GDT_TS scale, even for the most difficult targets, a major advance from the previous CASP. Note that the fold of the protein backbone is usually correct at values above 50 on this scale, and so that represented a solution to the problem as classically defined, for most targets.
Astonishingly, the trend curve for CASP14 (the black straight-line) starts at a GDT_TS of about 95, and finishes at about 85 for difficult targets. Because of experimental errors and artifacts, a GDT_TS of 100 is highly unlikely, and previous CASP trend lines intercept the Y axis at about 90, indicating that that is approximately the limit expected. In CASP14, about two-third of the 96 targets reached GDT_TS values greater than that, and so are considered competitive with experiment in backbone accuracy.”

“performance of servers in CASP14 (dotted black line in Figure 1) is similar to the best performance of all groups in CASP13. This is of particular significance since AlphaFold2 did not submit server models. Thus, other research groups have not only now surpassed AlphaFold's leading performance in CASP13, they have also made these improved methods available in servers, some of which are publicly accessible. Nevertheless, it is clear that the AlphaFold2 models are generally much more accurate, and the only ones to consistently approach experimental quality. For only four targets did another group obtain a higher GDT_TS.”

“Figure 4B shows that there is a strong relationship between target difficulty categories and the quality of experimental data obtained. That is, proteins belonging to well-studied protein families tend to yield high quality X-ray data. As a consequence, some of the decrease in average agreement with experiment for hardest targets may be due to higher experimental error.”

“Historically, the most accurate models have been obtained by leveraging information on related structures. A surprising feature of the CASP14 results is the small fall-off in agreement with experiment with fall-off in evolutionary information for related structures, especially compared to earlier CASPs. As noted above in Figure 1, the best model trend line starts at 95, but only falls to 85 for the most difficult targets. Apparently, there is only minor benefit from homologous structure information-models are only marginally more accurate when it is available.”

“The strong correlations between average GDT_TS, traditional target difficulty, and experimental data quality discussed above (Figure 4) make cause and effect hard to separate conclusively: It is not clear whether the remaining fairly small differences in performance across target categories are because the AlphaFold2 method performs somewhat better when there is information for homologous structures available, or if the performance differences are just due to differences in the average accuracy of the corresponding experimental structures.”

“Of the 105 residues involved, he found 64 to be close to lattice contacts, suggesting the local conformations are determined by the crystal environment (also not provided to the participants). For these regions, the best calculated structures likely provide conformations closer to that found in vivo than those from the crystal structure.”

“raditionally, CASP has used the multi-superposition, multiscale GDT_TS measure of agreement between models and experiment as a more robust metric than traditional RMSD when dealing with medium or poor quality models.23,24 In CASP 14, almost all best models are in close enough agreement with experiment for RMSD to be an appropriate metric,”

“As the PDB becomes more populated with large complexes, opportunities for homology modeling have steadily increased, and targets where that are possible continue to provide the most accurate models3 Where homology modeling is not possible, many groups used classical docking methods in which a search is made for sterically and electrostatically complementary surfaces.27 A number of groups have now augmented these with the prediction in interface residue-residue contacts, often employing deep-learning methods, for example, 22 producing some of the best results, although so far, the gains are fairly modest.”

“Most methods start with models of individual constituent proteins, and conformational changes accompanying complex formation as well as intertwining of monomers present major challenges.”

“using more accurate models of the constituent proteins will have a major impact on the effectiveness of classical docking methods. Second, deep-learning methods for interface residue contact prediction are still in their infancy. Third, at least one group (Baker) already has a "fold and dock” algorithm intended to model conformational change on binding.22 Fourth, that group has recently reported using deeplearning methods developed for single proteins to directly predict the structure of multimers”

(On their side quest to predict COVID protein structures, on the model selection methods -when not knowing a GT-) “A large set of accuracy estimates were also collected for the models. It turned out there was very little agreement as to which were the most accurate structures.” “By far the most accurate models are from the AlphaFold group, consistent with the later CASP results. But, only one EMA method selected an AlphaFold model as the best, for only one of the targets, and generally the AlphaFold models were not highly ranked.” “Results based on estimates of error provided by model builders themselves are much more encouraging. The AlphaFold2 method outputs estimated Ca errors directly from the structure modeling deep learning network. The average normalized accuracy in estimated Ca error (ASE) for their CASP14 models is 0.91 (out a maximum of possible 1.0), suggesting this approach to error estimation can be very effective.” “Interestingly, some of the less accurate AlphaFold2 error estimates are for targets where there is doubt about the quality of the experimental structures, such as the NMR targets discussed earlier.”

“A number of CASP participants also began using [CNNs] to predict a continuous probability function for inter-residue distances rather than just a binary yes/no for contacts.36 Together, these developments did result in the CASP13 major jump in 3D accuracy seen in Figure 1.”

“For CASP14, we maintained the category on binary contact prediction and extended it to include prediction of inter-residue probability distributions. There was no further improvement in the contact accuracy. That may reflect the fact that most creative energy went into the development of distance probability methods. This first assessment of probability accuracy showed a strong signal using newly developed metrics and provides a baseline against which to measure progress in future CASPs. The currently most successful deep-learning methods depend on predicting these distributions.”

“AlphaFold2 outlined four significant changes from their CASP13 methodologies and a detailed methodology paper describing these and many specifics has recently been published.38 The changes are: (a) an additional stage of the neural network architecture, which produces 3D coordinates rather than ending with inter-residue probability distributions as was done in CASP13. (b) Replacement of convolutional operations with attention learning. Convolutions do not appear ideal for distogram or contact map feature extraction, and in fact, it is surprising they work as well as they do. Attention learning is a rapidly advancing branch of deep learning 40 that in principle allows identification of the most important information flows in a network. (c) Some protein specific features, such as covalent geometry, were introduced into the network structure, partly tailoring the network to the specifics of the problem. (d) The network directly outputs confidence estimates for the position of each residue in the structure, and as noted earlier, these are impressively accurate.”

“The AlphaFold2 methodology consistently produces models competitive in accuracy with the best experimental results, and subatomic scale differences from experiment are the norm. In this sense, it is an almost complete solution to the problem of computing 3D structure from amino acid sequence.”

“recent CASPs have seen a dramatic reduction in the dependence of model accuracy on sequence alignment depth, a key ingredient in the classical contact prediction methods that preceded deep learning33 and also a usual input into deep learning networks.”

“conformational flexibility associated with docking to other molecules is already being addressed by members of the CASP community.22 As already noted, the new report from the Baker group uses the deep learning system developed for monomers to directly built multimers, in some circumstances, obviating the problem.22 Given adequate ligand docking methods (see below), allosteric conformational changes should be addressable. Short time scale classical dynamics do not appear to be within the scope of the methods, so there is still a role there for molecular dynamics.”

“As discussed earlier, there is reason to believe that the new methods will also be extended to protein complexes. As with protein docking, the CASP function assessors have shown that improved accuracy of structure models will improve the performance of current ligand docking methods, with implications for screening ligand specificity across all proteins. Deep-learning methods for small ligand docking have been developing in parallel to the protein structure work50 and a new community experiment (CACHE) similar to CASP is about to be launched to evaluate these. There are obvious implications for drug design and repurposing if the methods are as effective as claimed.”

